---
layout: post
title: Best way to stay cool
categories:
- chemistry
---

I was partying at a dance club, and it was busy, so I was getting a bit hot. So
I asked for some water - but what they gave me was 90% ice, topped off with
water. It did an awesome job at cooling me down.

Later on, I got thinking - *How much better is ice at cooling you down than
water?* (Hey, I was a chemistry student). While water does an admirable job
cooling you down at a dance party, clearly ice is better. But how much better?

## Defining Terms

I'm comparing:

- solid ice (0°C)
- liquid water (also at 0°C)

For cooling down a human (normally 37°C)

## Water

Water cools you down in two ways:

- Water is usually less than 37°C when you drink it. Once it is inside
  your body, its temperature rises. This takes energy - takes energy
  from your body heat, cooling you down.

- You can sweat the water out, where it vaporises (turns to gas). Vaporisation
  requires energy, some of which is taken from your body heat, cooling you
  down.

As anyone who's ever been to a concert can testify, sweating is useless when
there's no wind. So we can ignore its effects here.

It takes *4.18J* to heat one gram of water by 1°C. Ingesting
water at 0°C, you will raise its temperature by 37° to body
temperature. 

    4.18J/g x 37° = 155J/g

The energy to heat up the water comes from your body heat, so you will lose
*155J* per gram of water you drink.

## Ice

Ice melts, forming water (obviously). It takes a lot of energy to melt the
ice - you have to partially break hydrogen bonds - one of the strongest bonds
in chemistry. 

It takes *334J* to melt one gram of ice. That's almost twice the energy you
lose in heating that same gram of water from 0°C to 37°C!

And, once that gram of ice is melted, you're left with a gram of water at 0°.
Which, as we've established, cools you down by *155J*.

    melting energy + heating energy = total
    334J/g         + 155J/g         = 489J/g

## Conclusion
Drinking one gram of 0°C water will cool you down by *155J*.
Drinking one gram of ice at 0°C will cool you down by *489J*.

So, ice cools you down *over three times as well* as water. Awesome!
